# Bellabeat Case Study
*This project is conducted as a capstone project for the Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate Program*

## 1. Summary

### 1.1. About Bellabeat

[https://bellabeat.com/](https://bellabeat.com/)

Empower woman with knowledge about their own health and habits

- A successful high-tech manufacturer of health-focused products for **woman**
- Have potential to become a larger player in the **global smart device** market
- Products available through online retailers and their own e-com channel on their website
- Marketing activities extensively on digital media

#### Products
- **App:** provides data about **activity, sleep, stress, menstrual cycle, and mindfulness habits**
- **Leaf:** tracker - can be worn as a bracelet, necklace, or clip - tracks **activity, sleep, and stress**
- **Time:** watch - tracker - tracks **activity, sleep, and stress**
- **Spring:** water bottle - tracker - tracks daily water intake
- **Membership:** subscription-based program - gives 24/7 access to fully personalised guidance on 
nutrition, activity, sleep, health and beauty, and mindfulness based on lifestyle and goals

### 1.2. Business Task
Analysing the behaviour of an average female non-Bellabeat smart device user and discover patterns 
that can help Bellabeat to elevate their marketing strategy

Questions to be answered:
1. What are the trends in smart device usage?
2. How could these trends apply to Bellabeat customers?
3. How could these trends help influence Bellabeat marketing strategy?

## 2. Data Preparation
### 2.1. About Datasets

The dataset is publicly available through [kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arashnic/fitbit/code) and owned by Möbius.

It is generated by respondents to a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk between 12.03.2016 - 12.05.2016. 

Thirty eligible Fitbit users consented to the submission of personal tracker data, including 
minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring.

### 2.2. Data Organisation
The dataset includes 18 csv files, which 3 of them are wide-version duplicates.
Each document contains different metrics collected from the user that are assigned a unique user_id.

The files include 
- 1 file for daily activity data, 
- 14 files for steps, intensities, and calories data on day, hour and minute bases (together with the previously mentioned duplicated files), 
- 3 files for heartrate, sleep, and weight data

*The first problem I came across during the project was in this step. Considering that the number of rows in the document in not big, I decided to use MS Excel to conduct the pre-control of the data. However, as the date version of the document is in mm.dd.yyyy format as opposed to my computer settings being in dd.mm.yyyy format, I could not import the data to Excel using PowerQuery on Mac without losing data (the Mac version of Excel doesn't have the Power Query Editor feature yet as of today -01.05.2022) For a quick solution, I changed the region setting for Excel through computer settings.*

### 2.3. Data Limitations
The survey is announced to have data for the dates between 12.03 and 12.05, however from the dataset includes data only for the dates between **12.04 and 12.05**
- The limited time frame of the data may result with inconsistencies when compared with the long-term usage of the app

The survey is conducted with 33 users in total, however
- Only the activity data includes all 33 users (information on steps, intensities, and calories)
- Sleep data includes 24 users, which 9 of them have under 10 days of input
- Heart rate data includes 14 users
- Weight data includes only 8 users, which 6 of them have 5 or less days of input

Together with the inconsistent number of entries for different metrics, the data lacks the demographic data of the users, especially the gender information
- Bellabeat is a woman-centric company, for that reason the gender information of the data would be valuable

Finally, the dataset doesn't contain current data, the survey has been conducted in 2016.

*Keeping the limitations listed above in mind, the data can still be used to get an overall idea, however for an in depth analysis, the usage of another dataset that is more broad and current is advised*

## 3. Data Processing
I have used R for analysing the data with RStudio Desktop.

The R code I've used is included in the repository and can be reached via the link below:

[Fitbase_Data.R](Fitbase_Data.R)

### 3.1. Data Cleaning
As a first step, I checked the datasets uploaded with the **head()** function and realised that the date columns are shown as **char**

```
head(daily_activity) #date - char
head(heart_rate) #datetime - char
head(hourly_calories) #datetime - char
head(hourly_intensities) #datetime - char
head(hourly_steps) #datetime - char
head(daily_sleep) #datetime - char
head(weight_log) #datetime - char
```

For the sleep data I used only the date format as the time information on data were 12AM for all entries.
Also, for the weight data I used only the date format as the time information is irrelevant for this metric.

```
daily_activity$ActivityDate <- as.Date(daily_activity$ActivityDate, format ="%m/%d/%Y")
heart_rate$Time <- strptime (heart_rate$Time, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p")
hourly_calories$ActivityHour <- strptime (hourly_calories$ActivityHour, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p")
hourly_intensities$ActivityHour <- strptime (hourly_intensities$ActivityHour, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p")
hourly_steps$ActivityHour <- strptime (hourly_steps$ActivityHour, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p")
daily_sleep$SleepDay <- as.Date(daily_sleep$SleepDay, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p")
weight_log$Date <- as.Date(weight_log$Date, format = "%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p")
```

Next step, I checked the data for **zero step** and **zero intensitisy** entries in the activity logs. Zero-steps means that the fitbit has not been used in that time frame, so I excluded that entries from the data.

```
daily_activity %>% filter(TotalSteps == 0) # 77 entries among 940 have Total Step value of 0
daily_activity <- daily_activity %>% filter(TotalSteps != 0)

hourly_intensities %>% filter(TotalIntensity == 0) #9.087 entries among 22.099 have Total Intensity value of 0
hourly_intensities <- hourly_intensities %>% filter(TotalIntensity != 0)

hourly_steps %>% filter(StepTotal == 0) # 9287 entries among 22.098 have Total Step value of 0
hourly_steps <- hourly_steps %>% filter(StepTotal != 0)
```
















